.TH CAINTEOIR 1 "APRIL 2011" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
cainteoir \- listen to and record electronic books and documents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cainteoir [OPTION..]
.I document
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cainteoir
is a command\-line interface for Cainteoir Text-to-Speech.

The voice used to speak the document is determined in the following
order: the voice passed on the command-line; the language passed on
the command-line; the language specified by the document. If no
voice is found, the default voice is used.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-l LANG, --language=LANG"
Select a text-to-speech voice that can speak in the specified
language.
.IP "-M, --metadata"
Output the RDF metadata for the Cainteoir Text-to-Speech engine
and supported voices. This is output as RDF N-Triple statements.
.IP "-m, --monotone"
Set the voice to monotone. Equivalent to setting the pitch range
to 0.
.IP "-o FILE, --output=FILE"
The file to output to when recording audio. If not specified,
the author and title are used to create a file in the current
directory.
.IP "-p PITCH, --pitch=PITCH"
Set the voice's base pitch.
.IP "-P RANGE, --pitch-range=RANGE"
Set the voice's pitch variance to the specified value (with 0
being monotone).
.IP "-r [FORMAT], --record[=FORMAT]"
Record the document to the specified audio format ('wav' for wave
audio, 'ogg' for Ogg/Vorbis audio). If no format is specified,
wave audio is generated.
.IP "-s SPEED, --speed=SPEED"
Set the voice's reading speed to the specified number of words
per minute.
.IP "--stdout"
When recording, write the audio data to standard output instead
of a file.
.IP "-v VOICE, --voice=VOICE"
Select the text-to-speech voice with the specified name.
.IP "-V VOLUME, --volume=VOLUME"
Set the voice's volume to the specified value.
.SH AUTHOR
Reece H. Dunn <msclrhd@gmail.com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR espeak (1)
