.TH CAINTEOIR 1 "FEBRUARY 2014" "Cainteoir Text-to-Speech" "Cainteoir Manuals"
.SH NAME
cainteoir \- listen to and record electronic books and documents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cainteoir [OPTION..]
.I DOCUMENT
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cainteoir
is a command\-line interface for Cainteoir Text-to-Speech.

The voice used to speak the document is determined in the following
order: the voice passed on the command-line; the language passed on
the command-line; the language specified by the document. If no
voice is found, the default voice is used.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-c, --contents"
List the table of contents for the specified document.
.IP "-D DEVICE, --device=DEVICE"
Use the DEVICE ALSA/pulseaudio device name for audio output, e.g.
when the default device does not work.
.IP "-f FROM, --from=FROM"
Start reading/recording from the specified table of content entry.
If not specified, this defaults to the start of the document. The
value is the number provided from the table of contents output.
.IP "-h, --help"
Show a command-line option usage help message.
.IP "-l LANG, --language=LANG"
Select a text-to-speech voice that can speak in the specified
language.
.IP "-M, --metadata"
Output the RDF metadata for the Cainteoir Text-to-Speech engine
and supported voices. This is output as RDF N-Triple statements.
.IP "-m, --monotone"
Set the voice to monotone. Equivalent to setting the pitch range
to 0.
.IP "--narrator"
Use any embedded audio found in the document.
.IP "-o FILE, --output=FILE"
The file to output to when recording audio. If not specified,
the author and title are used to create a file in the current
directory.
.IP "-p PITCH, --pitch=PITCH"
Set the voice's base pitch.
.IP "-P RANGE, --pitch-range=RANGE"
Set the voice's pitch variance to the specified value (with 0
being monotone).
.IP "-q, --quiet"
Don't display the playing/recording time.
.IP "-r [FORMAT], --record[=FORMAT]"
Record the document to the specified audio format ('wav' for wave
audio, 'ogg' for Ogg/Vorbis audio). If no format is specified,
wave audio is generated.
.IP "-s SPEED, --speed=SPEED"
Set the voice's reading speed to the specified number of words
per minute.
.IP "--stdout"
When recording, write the audio data to standard output instead
of a file.
.IP "-t TO, --to=TO"
Read/record upto the specified table of content entry. If not
specified, this defaults to the end of the document. The value
is the number provided from the table of contents output.
.IP "--tts-fallback"
Use the currently selected TTS voice when there is no embedded
audio for the current text.
any embedded audio found in the document.
.IP "-v VOICE, --voice=VOICE"
Select the text-to-speech voice with the specified name.
.IP "-V VOLUME, --volume=VOLUME"
Set the voice's volume to the specified value.
.SH AUDIO BOOKS
With supported audio books -- such as ePub 3.0 documents with Media
Overlays -- Cainteoir Text-to-Speech allows you to use the audio within
that document instead of the Text-to-Speech voice. There are 3 possible
modes of playback:
.IP "text-to-speech only"
In this mode, any embedded audio is ignored and the selected TTS voice
is used to speak the text.
.IP "narration only"
In this mode (using the
.B --narrator
option), only the embedded audio of the document is used.
.IP "narration with text-to-speech fallback"
In this mode (using the
.B --narrator --tts-fallback
options), the embedded audio of the document is used if available,
otherwise the currently selected TTS voice is used.
.SH PLAYER COMMANDS
These commands are available when listening to or recording a document:
.IP "q"
Stops the reading or recording and exits the application.
.SH AUTHOR
Reece H. Dunn <msclrhd@gmail.com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR espeak (1)
